bpo-42392: Mention loop removal in whatsnew for 3.10 (#24256)
python/cpython: Doc/whatsnew/3.10.rst

  the :mod:`collections` module.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :issue:`37324`.)

* The ``loop`` parameter has been removed from most of :mod:`asyncio`\ 's
  :doc:`high-level API <../library/asyncio-api-index>` following deprecation
  in Python 3.8.  The motivation behind this change is multifold:

  1. This simplifies the high-level API.
  2. The functions in the high-level API have been implicitly getting the

>      current thread's running event loop since Python 3.6.  There isn't a need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     current thread's running event loop since Python 3.7.  There isn't a need to
```

Minor nit: the change was made after the addition of [`asyncio.get_running_loop()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-eventloop.html?highlight=get_running_loop#asyncio.get_running_loop), which was added in 3.7 rather than 3.6.

  a 16-bit unsigned integer.
  (Contributed by Erlend E. Aasland in :issue:`42393`.)

> * The ``loop`` parameter to nearly all :mod:`asyncio` functions has been removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The ``loop`` parameter has been removed from most of :mod:`asyncio`'s high-level API
```

Just to make this a bit more specifically accurate, this change only affected the [high-level members](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-api-index.html) of asyncio's API in areas where passing the event loop explicitly is not necessary because the functions were changed to implicitly use the currently *running* event loop (via get_running_loop(), added in 3.7), which is what the user intended in most situations. After this change, the user passing the event loop to those functions at best typically resulted in extra noise, and at worse the user providing an incorrect event loop (this mistake occurred especially often when using multiple threads). For areas where it has practical utility such as [low-level members](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-llapi-index.html) of the API targeted at library development (e.g. ensure_future()) or situations where users need more direct event loop management (e.g. set_event_loop()), it was not removed.

I'd also suggest including a summary of that above context for the whatsnew entry, to provide some purpose for the maintenance required for users that were affected by the change. From my understanding, the intention was to simplify asyncio for the majority of end users by removing the event loop arg when it provided them no real practical utility and removing a potential bullet to shoot themselves in the foot with.

  following deprecation in Python 3.8. For example, a coroutine that currently
  look like this::

>      import asyncio

Reviewer 2: I suggest to remove the import, it's not really relevant for the example.

     async def foo(loop):
         await asyncio.sleep(loop=loop)

>   Can *usually* be replaced with this::

Reviewer 3: Are there actually cases where this example is not the solution and another example should be provided? The APIs that I'm familiar with that got changed would be solved by this in every case, but maybe there are some that require a different fix?

If not, I'd remove the `*usually*` so there's no confusion about what else might need to be done.

Reviewer: It specifically doesn't apply if the user wants to utilize an event loop other than the currently running one. But, for 90% of use cases, the user will want to use the running event loop anyways (that's largely why the loop arg was removed in the first place). I expanded upon this in [another comment](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/24256#discussion_r560511567).

>   Can *usually* be replaced with this::

Reviewer 2: Since it's the common case, I suggest:

```suggestion
  Should be replaced with this::
```

     import asyncio

>      async def foo(loop):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     async def foo():
```

While it's not essential to remove it from foo(), it makes more sense to remove it since it no longer would serve a purpose after usage of *loop* is removed.

         await asyncio.sleep()

> 

Reviewer: I'd also add something along the lines of: "If it is specifically *not* intended to use the current running event loop (e.g. for using a loop in a separate OS thread), see :func:\`asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe()\`. However, simply removing the *loop* arg should work as intended for the majority of use cases." IMO, it's better to give some amount of context about the *usually* rather than leave the reader with uncertainty.

This should help to address the concern brought up by @vstinner in python-dev about helping users understand how to port their code. For most people, just removing the *loop* arg will have their code working as it was previously, potentially fix erroneous event loop usage, and improve readability. But IMO it would be better to not leave those that specifically don't want to use the current running loop completely in the dark, even if it doesn't apply to most.

  a 16-bit unsigned integer.
  (Contributed by Erlend E. Aasland in :issue:`42393`.)

* The ``loop`` parameter to nearly all :mod:`asyncio` functions has been removed
  following deprecation in Python 3.8. For example, a coroutine that currently
  look like this::

     import asyncio

     async def foo(loop):
         await asyncio.sleep(loop=loop)

  Can *usually* be replaced with this::

     import asyncio

     async def foo(loop):
         await asyncio.sleep()

  Maintaining backwards compatibility with 3.6 code is slightly trickier.
  Previous code using :mod:`asyncio` functions and classes, passing the loop
  explicitly and relying on special behavior will error on 3.10.  A possible
  option is to guard the old call with a check for Python versions before 3.7

>   and use the new call signature for newer versions.

Reviewer 2: It's possible to call sleep(), without passing a loop argument, in Python 3.6.

Extract of Python 3.6 implementation:

```
@coroutine
def sleep(delay, result=None, *, loop=None):
    ...
    if loop is None:
        loop = events.get_event_loop()
    ...
```

Author: Sorry, the language here wasn't too clear, what I meant was that code _relying specifically_ on the ability to attach asyncio futures to whatever loop they choose will break. Maybe I should just remove it to reduce confusion.

  a 16-bit unsigned integer.
  (Contributed by Erlend E. Aasland in :issue:`42393`.)

* The ``loop`` parameter to nearly all :mod:`asyncio` functions has been
  removed following deprecation in Python 3.8.  Users should instead get the
  current event loop inside of coroutines preferrably via
  :func:`asyncio.get_running_loop` (Python 3.7 and above) or
  :func:`asyncio.get_event_loop`.  For example, a coroutine that currently look
  like this::

     async def foo(loop):
         ...

  Can be replaced with this::

     import asyncio

     async def foo():
         # Note that this asserts the loop is already running.
         loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()

>          ...

Reviewer 2: I don't see the relationship with the removal of the loop parameter. For example, loop parameter was removed from the sleep() function. We don't have to modifiy the sleep() implementation, only calls to this function.

My question on python-dev was if it's safe to replace sleep(loop=loop) with sleep().

Author: > I don't see the relationship with the removal of the loop parameter. For example, loop parameter was removed from the sleep() function. We don't have to modifiy the sleep() implementation, only calls to this function.

Yeah I realised my examples need touching up. Thanks for pointing that out.

> My question on python-dev was if it's safe to replace sleep(loop=loop) with sleep().

Disclaimer: I'm not an asyncio internals expert by any means, so please take my opinion with a grain of salt.

Depends on the user code. IMO, for the most part, yes. But there are certain wacky scenarios where it's not. Asyncio has some checks against passing a loop to a coroutine that isn't executing in that loop:

So obviously wrong stuff like (in python 3.9)
```python
>>> import asyncio
>>> loop1 = asyncio.new_event_loop()
>>> loop2 = asyncio.new_event_loop()
>>> loop1.run_until_complete(asyncio.sleep(1, loop=loop2))
RuntimeError: Task <Task pending ... got Future attached to a different loop
```
However, I have no clue how creative some people's code can be ;).

Reviewer 2: I don't think that asyncio supports two event loops running at the same time. I guess that the common case is a single loop. It's just that previously, asyncio strongly adviced to always pass loop explicitly. Now it's the opposite: passing a loop raises an error...

Author: I'm going to wait for one of the experts on the bpo to give judgement on this, because I don't feel comfortable giving an opinion here.

Reviewer: @vstinner 
> I don't think that asyncio supports two event loops running at the same time. 

Asyncio supports multiple running event loops at the same time as long as they are in their own separate threads, just not in the same thread like in @Fidget-Spinner's example. E.g.

```py
>>> import asyncio
>>> async def show_run(name, count):
	loop = asyncio.get_running_loop()
	for i in range(count):
		await asyncio.sleep(2)
		print(f"{name} loop: {loop}")
		
>>> def loop_other_thread(name, count):
	print(f"start {name}")
	loop = asyncio.new_event_loop()
	asyncio.set_event_loop(loop)
	loop.run_until_complete(show_run(name, count))
	loop.close()
	print(f"end {name}")

>>> t1 = threading.Thread(target=loop_other_thread, args=('t1', 5))
>>> t2 = threading.Thread(target=loop_other_thread, args=('t2', 3))
>>> t1.start()
start t1
t1 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
>>> t2.start()
start t2
t1 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
t2 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
t1 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
t2 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
t1 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
t2 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
end t2
t1 loop: <_WindowsSelectorEventLoop running=True closed=False debug=False>
end t1
```

To make use of this in a practical scenario, one would presumably have access to both loops from the main thread and send coroutines to each via run_coroutine_threadsafe(). Although it's definitely less common, I think it's worth addressing via [my suggestion below](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/24256#discussion_r560511567)

  a 16-bit unsigned integer.
  (Contributed by Erlend E. Aasland in :issue:`42393`.)

* The ``loop`` parameter has been removed from most of :mod:`asyncio`\ 's
  :doc:`high-level API <../library/asyncio-api-index>` following deprecation
  in Python 3.8. The motivation behind this change is multifold:

  1. This simplifies the high-level API.
  2. The functions in the high-level API have been implicitly getting the
     current thread's running event loop since Python 3.6.  There isn't a need to
     pass the event loop to the API in most normal use cases.
  3. Event loop passing is error-prone especially when dealing with loops
     running in different threads.

>   Note that the low-level API has **not** been affected.

Reviewer 2: I suggest to move this rationale in the Removed section.

  A coroutine that currently look like this::

     async def foo(loop):
         await asyncio.sleep(1, loop=loop)

  Should be replaced with this::

     async def foo():
         await asyncio.sleep(1)

  If ``foo()`` was specifically designed *not* to run in the current thread's
  running event loop (eg. running in another thread's event loop), consider

>   using :func:`asyncio.run_coroutine_threadsafe` instead.

Reviewer 2: Great remark!

  a 16-bit unsigned integer.
  (Contributed by Erlend E. Aasland in :issue:`42393`.)

* The ``loop`` parameter has been removed from most of :mod:`asyncio`\ 's
  :doc:`high-level API <../library/asyncio-api-index>` following deprecation
  in Python 3.8.

  A coroutine that currently look like this::

     async def foo(loop):
         await asyncio.sleep(1, loop=loop)

  Should be replaced with this::

     async def foo():
         await asyncio.sleep(1)

  If ``foo()`` was specifically designed *not* to run in the current thread's

>   running event loop (eg. running in another thread's event loop), consider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  running event loop (e.g. running in another thread's event loop), consider
```
